someone sent me an email recently and
opened with a sort of apology like hey
look I know you're busy sorry from
writing to you wouldn't imposing an
atomic busy and I wrote back and said
I'm not busy and moreover I think it's a
really important discipline to have as
an adult to be aware of when you're not
busy precisely so that you make more
productive use of your time and
conversely a lot of people get the fixed
notion in their minds that being busy is
a virtue and they complain that they're
busy all the time
and they protest to others that they're
they make up they make a conspicuous
display of their busyness all the time
because they think being busy is a
virtue in itself and the result is
you're not actually using your time as
effective as it could and you're
definitely not being as generous and
welcoming to others as you could because
you're pretending to be busy when you're
really not
now there's something similar that sets
in with many other virtues we may get
attached to like the notion that
learning a language is a virtue in and
of itself the notion that learning many
languages makes you sophisticated makes
you cosmopolitan learning a language and
learning history are two very different
things
learning a language and learning
politics or two different things
learning a language and learning tact
you know sophistication of that sense
are two different things learning you
know learning a language is completely
different from learning the kind of
customs and manners of a particular
country or people learning their culture
in a way that lets you express yourself
in when it's even politically sensitive
little unsophisticated
learning a language I've been arguing is
not a virtue in and of itself and a lot
of people get stuck on this notion that
it's virtuous and then the most extreme
examples here on the internet are people
who commit to learning twelve languages
I saw another example of that where was
exactly 12 found two different female
youtubers who are learning twelve
languages concurrently I why the number
12 I don't know get to a full dozen and
then stop but my point is here not to
just talk about diminishing returns we
have this idiom in English the
point of diminishing returns that I
think everyone would agree on nobody is
really gonna seriously protest that you
shouldn't stop at eight languages you
should keep going to and you know before
I used the example of lifting two
hundred pounds of the gym versus lifting
270 pounds that doesn't mean the same
logic applies to lifting 500 pounds at
that point you're making a sacrifice
that's really gonna destroy your life
but I really want to talk about a matter
in principle why would it be virtuous
why would it make you a better person to
learn even one language or two so I got
a message from a viewer here any rights
what makes you want to learn new
languages in the first place this is but
this is Alex by the way supporter of the
channel with Greek for example
specifically when basically enough is
enough with the language I would think
someone like you might prefer to get
into depth in one language instead of
dealing superficially with several
different languages he goes on to say I
ask you because you mentioned the
temptation to learn it and you have the
book you mentioned the cost but what is
the reward for you is it mostly the
sense of humility you mentioned in the
video okay so I think humility is the
simplest one to deal with we can deal
with it kind of right away here at the
beginning for a white person living in
genocide 'el Canada it takes humility to
learn Cree it takes humility to learn a
Jib way it takes humility to learn
Mohawk if you're a white person living
in the southern United States it takes
humility to learn Navajo so there are
some contexts where the sense of
humility is really significant now
conversely I don't really know if most
people think of it as humility if you
are a Mexican immigrant to Canada is it
humility to then learn English you know
it probably doesn't have the same
significance and there I think the other
combinations are kind of points along a
spectrum where there's some rule for
humility but it may not be what you
think it is now again one of the reasons
why I'm being so skeptical about this is
I met white men in Thailand who were on
a huge ego trip because they learn to
speak incredibly poor
fragments of the Thai language in a
broken and incorrect an incoherent way
but they got laid women slept with them
and you know they thought they were
racing ahead and slaves to thought they
were making tremendous progress they're
a tremendous ego trip for them it wasn't
humbling at all it wasn't this role of
humility yeah and in a very different
context when you look at Buddhism or
Hinduism people learning sacred
languages like Pali sacred language is
like Sanskrit there are really strange
ego trips that people are on when they
can't put together the sentence the man
walked the well to get some water you
know we're really they have incredibly
rudimentary ability in his lineage but
they think they're unlocking the sacred
secrets of 2,000 years of philosophy and
religion so on so look at you know what
you can even find people who are an ego
trip with French or Irish Gaelic right
it's very strange but you know I think
we probably could use laboratory methods
to investigate this we probably could do
real social science research why is it
that some people find the study of
languages humbling and others it has the
sort of opposite intoxicating ego
aggrandizing effect and I think to a
large extent it would be the people who
live in self-selected blindness to their
own ignorance it is humbling for example
to learn Cambodian if you're aware that
you're constantly saying everything
wrong and when I spoke Cambodian I would
really make the effort to speak with
great precision with great accuracy and
was really aware when I was miss
speaking but if instead you just have a
sloppy attitude of pronouncing
individual words wrong and putting the
sentence together in the wrong order and
you don't care and people around you
have to figure out what you mean maybe
that recklessness is gonna lead to a
greater sense of reward for much less
work if you care about accuracy care of
us anything's right and then also caring
about accuracy it doesn't just mean you
were examining the language it also
means you're examining yourself and you
have that I think ineluctably humbling
experience of realizing how limited your
capacity is to catch up with a
five-year-old child you might work very
hard as an adult for
ten years to catch up with the level of
fluency a five-year-old child has
especially we talk about a really hard
language like this some it's a very far
removed from your your mother tongue
something like Cambodian Japanese so on
and so forth okay baby you you had so my
girlfriend's your Afghan you let's learn
to say on this topic I think connected
to humility in learning language yeah
the more that you'd say the more I think
yeah you're right I can relate to that
we had the experience when she was four
and five and her level of French was you
know exponentially higher than mine was
I mean yeah I just say I do wonder what
you might say to this idea that there is
a sense of accomplishment and I felt a
sense of accomplishment when I was
living in China initially and was like
basically relying on you like any time
we'd go out and buy anything from the
grocery store from a restaurant like I'd
you know at first I didn't know any
Chinese but then once I learned more and
then especially when I was living in
Taiwan and studying Chinese full-time
when I started to be able to even just
order something you know it's it was
just finally like like wow you know
that's really cool that I can like
communicate with somebody from a
completely different culture so I don't
I don't think I'm not an ego trip about
it but I just think it's kind of a neat
thing so it's not really worth you know
all the suffering that that aspect alone
isn't but I just want to say that that
is a neat thing and I was you know I'm
not in it for sleeping with Taiwanese
men you know like like who's men might
be a no for sleeping with Thai women or
something like that
but yeah the thing that I was thinking
of with languages you know there might
be some something to the idea that when
you're working on the rudimentary
aspects of language getting to the very
fundamentals that it may help you in
other areas of your life or other areas
of study to kind of question it from the
basics so look I agree the kind of two
levels this one is cultural and then one
is really more purely psychological and
philosophical um there are some people
who are maybe so sheltered and live
lives that are so narrow-minded
that's simply having a diff
perspective would also be a better
perspective right but I just point out a
different perspective just because it's
different from when you've already got
is not necessarily superior or better or
what-have-you
let's give an example right now maybe
someone in Israel who lived their whole
lives being a kind of Israeli national
and supporting the Israel government for
them to take some time to live in Persia
the modern state of Iran and learn
Persian Iranian what every must say and
learn to see the world from an Iranian
perspective that could be very
meaningful you know I can see however
it's just another perspective it's just
a different perspective it's not a
better perspective it's bettering you as
a person only in as much as you've taken
on a kind of narrow brittle individual
perspective that excludes that other
perspective there's something you
haven't thought of well I'm gonna save
myself I'm not boasting I do not think I
would benefit from living in Iran and
taking on the Iranian perspective in any
way whatsoever
now I'm 41 years old I've had a lot of
travel I have a very cosmopolitan I
already have learned several languages
as been mentioned and lived in many
different cultures so that's kind of
again relative to the individual now I
mean you can still generalize about it
doesn't mean there are no
generalizations moved there I mean maybe
someone who grew up in Kansas in the
United States and who's only spoken
English their whole life it only has a
kind of American view of the world maybe
even just learning French and learning
to see the world in a French way could
have a positive impact maybe learning
Chinese and seeing the child the world
through a Chinese perspective a little
bit could have a pause me back maybe
baby
[ __ ] yeah if you were actually using
social science methods here we'd have to
also measure and count when it has a
negative effect and I've I've met white
men who went to China and learned a
little bit of Chinese and slept with
some local women and a lot of them you
know started drinking the local alcohol
and stuff and I can look at them and say
wow learning Chinese is that a really
negative affection and it certainly
wasn't humbling they found it empowering
they got on an ego trip they go to this
other country and
even worth questioning do do they really
feel that they've gained a Chinese
perspective or do they just feel that
they're on an ego trip cuz they came to
China and they got to impose their the
superiority of their American view of
the world do they just go around China
they go
none of these Chinese people appreciate
democracy and freedom and what really
happened during World War two the way I
do the white middle-aged ego is very
often linked to memories of World War
two
the supposed superiority of your
historical knowledge of World War two
and and lecturing your teenage Asian
girlfriend about how much more you know
about World War two which is seen this
in Thailand see that in China see it but
anyway it's also true each one of these
countries has its own kind of propaganda
version of World War two so even in
Japan if you have a Japanese girlfriend
even if you have a 40 year old Japanese
girlfriend probably Rafi so there's a
reason why that that particular history
I'm mentioning here as a kind of
touchstone so you know it's not
necessarily public that's the kind of
comparative cultural anthropology side
look let's keep it all the way real if
you're talking about learning a language
that was never written like a language
that was never associated with a massive
urban civilization a language that maybe
stayed in the stone Age's so to speak
something like that then I think there's
probably a sense in which nobody looks
at this as taking on a superior
perspective it's just a different
perspective so you know anthropologists
like my ex-wife she was an
anthropologist that learned a language
that had no written history that was
basically associated with the kind of
Stone Age tribal people or Bronze Age
you know they lived at a very low level
of Technology and so on in the jungle
etc so if you go out and learn that
language what is that effect so maybe
but so the other side of what you're
saying I don't want to say more about it
that I think is more purely
philosophical psychological okay
isn't there something positive to be
said about going back to basics about
looking at the rudiments of thought and
how language how thoughts are formed in
language then this kind of thing well
I'm curious what you have fine but look
most of what you spend your time with
with Chinese is there anything profound
and meaningful with
reconsidering the way you express from
and to in a sentence you know is there
anything is there anything that really
reveals before I use the example of
numbers you don't come to some new
insight about numbers or math by
learning how one other language
expresses numbers I'm being skeptical
and rigorous here people I'm not I'm not
gonna tell you there's no benefit at all
but we've got to be skeptical this yeah
I don't know if there's real inherent
value but I think it is interesting for
example today we were talking about 10
in Chinese this idea that there are
similarities between English and Chinese
despite them being so foreign so this
means like before but it's it also has
the same meaning in English so you know
there's also oh sorry I just clarify
though so it's a clarify for the
audience this is a word that means
before both in the sense of something
being prior in time but it also has the
sense of before means something's before
you meaning in front of you this is a
very very strange coincidence that in
English the word before also has this
double meaning that's an illogical
double meaning field right right so I
mean yes on an on a linguistic level I
think it is interesting but you know one
other thing that I wanted to say do you
mind if I talk more on the the other
aspect of being humbling to you know I
think it really boils down to the
intentions of learning another language
is you know you you get out of it what
you put into it
quid pro quo is this statement that's
now becomes so popular and well-known in
America you know you get out of it what
you put into it and you know I I think I
would be funny to share this example and
I learned to order food in Chinese and I
got comfortable it's a certain level of
you know speaking with people one-on-one
but because we didn't live in France
like long term when I was in France I
found it like very scary the idea of
just ordering a falafel sandwich you
know and I let it like really kind of
get to me I was like I can't order
anything or like even like going to the
grocery store I'm like afraid to like
ask somebody but like French is so much
you know it's a lot more similar to
English than than Chinese is even though
I
to this level of competency in Chinese
so maybe there's um maybe there's
something to say for getting over the
fear of communicating like with learning
another language maybe fear of foreign
nests or few of those kinds bit right
right yes exactly so yeah I think it is
you know about intentions I mean if
you're going to a foreign country and
learning their language just to look
this thing for me there's a difference
between knowing something and being able
to verify something for yourself so I'm
gonna go through a couple languages
rapidly examples of this I can explain
to you right now in English that the
meaning of the word oligarchy in ancient
Greek is not really the same as the
meaning of oligarchy in modern English
but we can we can do this entirely in
English you don't need to know Greek and
I don't need to know Greek either I can
just share with you you know so when
you're reading Aristotle and what
Aristotle says but oligarchy you really
have to keep in mind it doesn't mean the
same thing we mean now by oligarchy okay
now even the word King it does not mean
in ancient Athens in ancient Greek at
all what it means today in English this
really it's really very important to
understand that difference in the
meaning of King then and King now one
that's very well known is tyrant the
meaning of tyrants doesn't mean okay but
this whole discourse the all the
learning about it and I can give
examples when you talk about political
philosophy and why this matters and so
on we can do this all in English what
you would gain by putting in hundreds of
hours to learn ancient Greek is the
ability to verify this for yourself the
ability to go to the original sources
and see for yourself
in what ways the translation is
misleading right you can't do that in
English only but all the other benefits
that we attribute to language learning
language education you can get in your
primary language right now again I'm
going to come back this question of
going back to basics dealing with the
rudiments of thought and philosophy I
think that still leaves something
unanswered here so look with Buddhist
philosophy the reason why it's so
important to read the original ancient
languages is that all of the other
translators are lying to you there
tremendous dishonesty to give a really
easy example the translation of the word
slave as servant sometimes translation
of the word prostitute as servant you
get this kind of thing you know
intentionally where it's it's just
censoring in this way but there is a
word that meant summary like the summary
of a tech like a bullet point summary of
a text and it was being translated as
like Transcendental Meditation where
there was a really crazy you know
religious and philosophical meanings
being foisted onto things that are just
not there
so in that case the ability to verify
what things mean for yourself is huge if
you really want to know about but it's
philosophy and the type of conversation
I'm saying about Greek you couldn't have
because there isn't enough honest
scholarship in English already for you
to talk that through in the way I was
just discussing it you know the way I
sorry I don't know ancient Greek but
I've now been reading in English about
ancient Greek for a long time so I'm
aware of many of the issues that come up
in translation if you just pay attention
to the footnotes of a really good
edition it'll sons draw your attention
to this hey you know this word has two
different meanings and some translators
do it this way and some do that way in
this context so on and so forth so you
know if you met someone who wanted to
study the philosophy of Taoism right so
Taoism the Canon is in Chinese and it's
quite difficult to understand Chinese
what would their expectations be in a
really learning Chinese rather than
working with English translations well
if your interest is in understanding
exactly how the English translations are
really awful what's wrong with them
then you'll accomplish that but I think
most people who engage in learning
languages this way even a modern
language like Russia I think they do
have deceptive Hallowed expectation that
it's really gonna make them a better
person that they're gonna change as a
person some profound sense you know now
I know Sanskrit now I can read Hebrew
now I can read Latin Greek you know etc
and I do people might not be as open
about it I know people who studied
German to read philosophy and German
German is almost the same language as
English they're so close but
nevertheless no oh no you have to read
Hegel in the original German this kind
of [ __ ] where it does have this
hallowed sense of personal
transformation and transcendence that
you're supposedly getting through
learning a language but I don't I don't
believe in at all and I would caution
everyone against that that misconception
so what would learning Chinese
accomplish
again if it's about interrogating the
text verifying what it really says for
yourself challenging existing
scholarship there are various ways in
which it's interesting but when you look
at a language asymmetry of that kind it
there's nothing positive for you in it
there's nothing that transforms you so
Melissa mentioned this anecdote no
offense but it's just an anecdote Oh in
Chinese there's this word that means
before and has the same kind of double
meaning as English before in time and
standing before you okay interesting
anecdote with the comparison of any two
languages there will be hundreds of
anecdotes like that and then you get
into anecdotes about the ways in which
they're different sometimes different in
kind of baffling and untranslatable ways
so again if you're talking about
Buddhist philosophy or Taoist you know
so you have a bunch of and like that's
even talking about politics in ancient
Greece the word vote doesn't mean the
same thing an ancient creek is it means
in English what's translated English
just vote you know interesting you know
okay so you you learn a bunch of
asymmetry see doesn't make you a better
person doesn't make you more
sophisticated it doesn't make you more
intelligent doesn't have any kind of
personal transformative effect on you
right I mean maybe it gives you a
greater sensitivity to how much
methodological rigor really matters -
how much honesty and integrity matters
how easy it is to mislead people you
know indeed even with the translation of
the Bible it's kind of amazing you know
the power that rests in the translators
pen or something sure okay but again you
could you could get that from watching
this YouTube video right now you don't
have to spend hundreds of hours learning
Japanese or hundreds of hours learning
Hebrew or Greek or Latin or whatever the
example is so that's that's kind of a
warning I think I don't say town and
it's it's hundreds and hundreds of hours
one season of it yeah
I mean what you say is all very
interesting to me and I'm sorry to be at
a such a basic level with what do I have
to say I mean like I think you've got a
lot more experience learning languages
but I guess one thing I can say is
there's nothing quite like the feeling
of stupidity when you are learning a new
language and trying to communicate at
such a rudimentary level like recently I
was it's like a second childhood as I've
been implying you have to regress to a
childhood speaking with a native Chinese
speaker in my hometown and I was like
you know I just had to say in Chinese
like I'm sorry I speak like a baby in
Chinese you know like um but it's it's
it's um I think there's something useful
about it or there's something that might
maybe that does make you a better person
like accepting that you like rather than
thinking that you know look so there
were several translation controversies
in Buddhist philosophy that I took a
stand on where I said look every
whatever one thinks this meanings in
English is a hundred percent wrong and
one of the simplest ones was the Buddha
is black that in the text it says the
Buddha is the color of his skin is black
not brown not tin not dark tan it said
black doesn't but there were people
still known on the internet who claim
the guy had blonde hair and white skin
it's like no if you actually read the
text there's nothing ambiguous about it
black and so that's one of the most
obvious but also controversies about
passengers on translation being sorry
passages on transcendental meditation
being totally misses mistranslated zone
it is true that when I talked about
those controversies with people who had
never done work on a language they found
it inconceivable and I mean that in the
strict sense they could not imagine that
it was possible that this translation
was lying to them right
whereas for someone like me I can't
imagine him and we've been talking a lot
lately about how my past experience with
Buddhist scholarship really helps me to
think more incisively and analytically
about Greek philosophy so you know I'm
able to look at the kind of excuses and
rationalizations that Western
interpreters of Plato and Aristotle have
and be able to say look this is where
the evidence of the texts stops and then
this is where the excuses made by the
raw
readers starts you know I'm aware of
that gap much more dynamically because
of my work on other languages yeah
without even getting into learning
ancient Greek yeah and I noticed this
too earlier this summer I was starting
to read the Bible and I was getting into
just the first chapter there's so much
of it that you know if you actually got
to the original translation or you know
this series of I want to double down
this two ways
so when Melissa was reading the Bible
it's true I know the Bible better but
it's also just because I have this
training so when I'm reading the same
passage of the Bible I'm finding like 10
things wrong with it like 10 red flags
and I'm saying what's okay do you notice
this do you notice this Genesis I'm
finding problems in the text there's not
really problem the translation there
problems in the actual source material
and melissa is not seeing that melissa
is just reading in like this is kind of
confusing it's kind of hard to follow
right so so that that's in tourism that
reflects the kind of I guess you could
call it Phil illogical training but the
language the language base with Esther
but also when we were just reading in
English we Melissa had a simple
guidebook text to the history of Greece
here and every page I was finding things
wrong with it finding errors and in many
cases the errors didn't it wasn't that I
had other factual knowledge of this
degree some cases it was it's like I
knew I knew its effect but where there's
an inconsistency or self-contradiction
or incoherence in the text but I'm not
just skipping over with my I'm catching
on that like no you know if that
happened at that stage of the war then
it's impossible that eight years later
this other thing happens you know where
I'm catching those things so that's
that's true or maybe the person who is
detail oriented is may be attracted to
learning languages but well then I mean
like saying it's humbling I think you've
got to be able to go out and actually
look at it on a social science basis and
say well for whom is it humbling and for
whom is it an ego trip because for some
it's one of them that's right yeah yeah
no I do think that's especially learning
Chinese if you if you just miss one
character in a sentence when somebody's
speaking to you if you don't know one
character or if you don't know one word
it's like you don't get the sentence at
all you know being able to this
listening comprehension reading
comprehension
in another language maybe enhances even
your understanding of your native
language or like your appreciation for
you your definitely your awareness of
the distinctive features of that so I
think it's implicit in the point I made
in the earlier video implicit in the
point that language is not just a way of
communicating but is a way of thinking
it's that there's some value in trying
out different ways of thinking however I
don't think it's the value people are
expecting or hoping for or yearning for
you know and I also have to insist
different doesn't mean better right like
you know it's true I mean in some other
language the way that time is expressed
is a little bit different you know the
way that emotions are expressed is
different that's always something people
find charming about lotion and and tie
those languages like oh you know the
blackness of my heart and the stuff you
get these kind of different ways it's
not that surprising of expressing
emotions you know what even things like
racism and nationalism are expressed
differently in that it is interesting i
mean when i was when i was in laos a lot
of what i was learning about the ways in
which other nationalities are racist
against lao people and the way in which
they're racist against everyone
including people within their own kind
it's interesting I admit it you know
there's there's some value to that and
you know many times I've spoken to
people who are more or less racists in
the Western world and one of the ways to
challenge them or deprogram them is just
to really say to them like have you ever
thought about the fact that like people
in Thailand hate people from Cambodia
like let's talk about some other
examples here who thought of other
people people from the lowland in Laos a
racist against people from the highlands
like have you thought about some
situations where you don't have any
personal attachment to this so yeah
seeing the world in a different way
thinking world and if it isn't thinking
or seeing in a better way and I think
that's part of what made learning Latin
so mystical for Europeans for such a
long time you know you were living in
your dead-end job in Scotland and then
you started learning Latin and learning
Latin would give you a world of
difference
concepts different just different words
different ways of thinking different
ways to express yourself different
different ideas and different express it
is but different doesn't mean better and
doesn't mean you couldn't arrive those
things without learning Latin so on and
so forth it was just you know I know
obviously the for many of those people
they were actually reading the Bible in
Latin they were reading Cicero in Latin
that were reading political philosophy
in Latin and probably they wouldn't have
been reading any of those things in
English you know it exposed you to a
different different set of ideas okay so
finally the basic challenge you've
raised to me here melissa is that
there's something really important about
getting down to the rudiments of
language and thought and re-examining
them again and you're probably right but
it's not what most people are looking
for because what most people are looking
for is greater sophistication greater
analytic ability just I'm like I said
when I was holding up those two books
before probably what most people want is
to have a sophisticated understanding of
Chinese politics in history and you're
not gonna get that by spending hundreds
of hours understanding the way in which
Chinese expresses the passive voice
that's one of the most annoying things
if English is your first language just
trying to do passive voice in Chinese
that's that's a huge challenge to master
doing passive voice sentences and in
Chinese I never do it when I speak
Chinese I always use active voice it's
just a boy I avoid using it but if you
really want to sound like a native
speaker you got a pact at practice doing
those other those other sentence
patterns maybe one day I'll give you an
update on that um so you know when
people are looking for sophisticated
understanding you have to be looking at
much much higher levels of language
learning much more deep but but just
more factually dense and complex things
and with embarking on learning another
language yes you're reduced to this
childlike state shallow like process of
starting again with the bare rudiments
of language but what you're learning as
an adult it's not meaningful in the way
that people want it to be so let's close
by just asking what does it mean to be a
good person you know if the delusion is
that learning a foreign language will
make you a better person
that leads us to question what are our
assumptions about being a good person
learning twelve languages will not make
you vegan none of these people are
freaking learning of learning two
languages let's just say you learn
Chinese and French it won't make you
care about ecology it won't make you
care about war it won't make you care
about torture or human rights it won't
make you want to go to the prison and
help improve prison conditions right it
won't make you more compassionate it
won't make you more caring it won't make
you more responsible it won't make you
concerned about there was the
consequences of your own actions it
won't make you concerned about the
consequences of other people's actions
or the society or part of it won't make
you more participatory in the democratic
system it won't it won't make you more
kind towards your aunt and uncle or your
cousins now there are myriad notions of
what it is to be a good person or to
live a good life but I think it's
actually interesting to say that
learning languages probably will help
you with none of them unless again
you're starting from a position of such
incredible narrow mindedness you know
like maybe the person who lived their
whole life in Israel as a kind of
Zionist nationalist who then goes and
spend some time in Iran is like whoa
there's another way of seeing that well
unless you're starting from such a
narrow and brittle position the learning
a language brings about this kind of
ethical transformation maybe that does
make them more compassionate you know
maybe for a white American who's racist
against black people in America maybe if
they go to Africa and learn any
particular black language let's say it's
Swahili and live among black people in
Africa in an all-black environment
speaking that language maybe when they
go back to America that'll make them
less less racist but I can only say
maybe because I gotta tell you something
I knew a white guy I knew one white guy
he was blond and white he went to Africa
he learned African languages he had also
lived in Brazil and he slept with an
enormous number of black women in both
Africa and Brazil and when he went back
to the United States of America he was
still racist as hell against black
people he was if anything more racist
against black people in America because
he would he would say to them I think
most of time he just said it to his
white friends probably sometimes he said
to them he would say to them
why aren't you more like the black
people I knew in Africa and was like he
felt they were yeah he thought they were
examples of positive black communities
and he intensely hated the blacks of
Mesmer if I hadn't met that guy myself
talked to him for hours
fascinating example of human nature so
again I think you have to remain
skeptical about this in the purest sense
of the world purest sense the word
skepticism even if this can have
positive outcomes for some people remain
open-minded about what percentage of
people this is gonna have negative
outcomes for even if it's humbling for
some people for what percentage of
people will it be an ego trip